Linux Log Analysis – SSH Authentication Investigation
Project Overview
This project demonstrates how Linux authentication logs can be analyzed to detect suspicious login activity and investigate potential brute-force attacks.
A Linux virtual machine was used to simulate failed SSH login attempts. System logs were then reviewed using command-line tools to identify authentication failures and analyze the activity recorded in the logs.
This investigation replicates a basic Security Operations Center (SOC) log analysis task commonly performed by cybersecurity analysts.
Lab Environment
Operating System: Linux VM (RHEL based)
Virtualization Platform: VirtualBox
Log File Analyzed: /var/log/secure
Service Investigated: SSH (Secure Shell)
Tools Used:
ssh
grep
wc
ss
systemctl
Step 1 – Verify SSH Service Status
First, the SSH service was verified to ensure it was running on the system.
Command used:
systemctl status sshd
This confirms that the OpenSSH service is active and listening for connections.
📸 Evidence
Step 2 – Verify SSH Port is Listening
Next, the system was checked to confirm that the SSH service was listening on port 22.
Command used:
ss -tulpn
This command displays all active listening ports and the associated processes.
📸 Evidence
Step 3 – Generate Failed SSH Login Attempts
To simulate suspicious activity, multiple failed login attempts were performed using invalid credentials.
Command used:
ssh fakeuser@localhost
The system rejected the login attempts because the username does not exist.
This activity generated authentication failure entries in the system logs.
📸 Evidence
Step 4 – Review Authentication Logs
Linux authentication activity is recorded in the following log file:
/var/log/secure
This file contains records of login attempts, authentication successes, and failures.
Command used:
sudo cat /var/log/secure
The log entries include:
timestamp
username attempted
authentication method
source IP address
failure reason
📸 Evidence
Step 5 – Filter Failed Login Attempts
To identify authentication failures, the grep command was used to filter log entries containing "Failed password".
Command used:
sudo grep "Failed password" /var/log/secure
This command isolates only the failed login attempts from the authentication logs.
📸 Evidence
Step 6 – Count Failed Login Attempts
To determine the total number of failed login attempts, the following command was used:
sudo grep "Failed password" /var/log/secure | wc -l
Result:
25 failed login attempts
This confirms that multiple authentication failures occurred during the simulation.
📸 Evidence
Log Analysis Findings
The investigation identified multiple failed SSH login attempts recorded in the authentication logs.
Each log entry contained:
timestamp of the attempt
username used in the login attempt
source IP address
SSH session details
authentication failure message
Example log entry:
Failed password for invalid user fakeuser from ::1 port 53918 ssh2
Repeated login failures such as these can indicate brute-force attacks against an SSH service.
Security Recommendations
If this activity occurred in a production environment, the following security controls should be implemented:
Block suspicious IP addresses using firewall rules
Implement Fail2Ban to automatically block repeated login attempts
Disable root login over SSH
Enforce SSH key-based authentication
Monitor authentication logs regularly
Implement intrusion detection systems
Skills Demonstrated
This project demonstrates the following cybersecurity skills:
Linux system log analysis
SSH authentication monitoring
command-line log filtering
basic incident investigation
identifying brute-force attack patterns
Linux security fundamentals
Project Conclusion
This project demonstrates how Linux authentication logs can be used to detect suspicious login activity. By generating failed SSH login attempts and analyzing the resulting log entries, it is possible to identify indicators of potential brute-force attacks.
Log analysis is a critical skill for security analysts because it enables early detection of malicious activity and supports incident response investigations.
